Ituri militias agree to work with transitional government Page 1 of 2
PUBLIC ANNEX 1
IRINnews.org
DRC: Ituri militias agree to work with transitional government
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Tuesday 13 June 2006
KINSHASA, 25 Aug 2003 (IRIN) - Militias in the embattled Ituri District of northeastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) have agreed to work together with the newlyinaugurated transitional government in restoring state authority across the region, Thomas
Lubanga, head of the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC) told IRIN on Monday.
The news follows several days of discussions held last week in the national capital, Kinshasa,
between 29 representatives of numerous rival militias and the new national government, aimed
at including the armed groups in a peace and reconciliation process from which they had
complained of being excluded.
In a memorandum of understanding signed at the end of the talks, the Ituri militias pledged to
end hostilities in the region and to bring an end to "uncontrolled" groups that have continued to
commit massacres despite the signing of several ceasefire agreements.
"We decided to put past stumbling blocks behind us in favour of focusing on ways in which we
could participate in restoring peace in the region," Lubanga said, after a meeting with DRC
President Joseph Kabila.
"We met with the president in an effort to work towards what is most important for the
Congolese people: the reunification of the country," he said.
"Previously, we were in camps that were diametrically opposed, with the government allied to
Mbusa Nyamwisi of the RCD-K/ML [Rassemblement congolais pour la democratieKisangani/Mouvement de libération former rebel movement], with whom we had fought, while
we had the RCD-Goma [former rebel movement] as an ally ... all this served as grounds for war
between us," Lubanga added.
He remained in Kinshasa on Monday. The leaders of the other militias returned to Bunia, the
principal town of Ituri, over the weekend.
"We asked that our troops be integrated into the united national army, which is in the process of
being formed," Jerome Kakawavu Bakonde of the Forces armées du peuple Congolais (FAPC)
said.
"We also wanted to be included in the management of the country through the various
transitional government institutions," Floribert Ndjabu Ngabu, leader of the Front des
nationalistes et integrationnistes, said.
"There will be solutions at the political and military levels," national Defence Minister Jean-Pierre
Ondekane, of the RCD-Goma former rebel movement, said last week.
"As for the government, we cannot violate the constitution by adding posts that were not
foreseen," he added.
"We brought them to Kinshasa to listen to them, to hear their concerns," Interior Minister
Theophile Mbemba, of the former Kinshasa government, told IRIN. "In turn, ministers
responsible for various sectors will make proposals."
He added: "While it is true that we are not going to condone the massacres for which they are
responsible, there have been a number of problems, which we must approach in a calm manner.
"The government has made a number of decisions, including the deployment of an integrated
http://www.irinnews.org/print.asp?ReportID=36173 13/06/2006
DRC-OTP-0159-0276
ICC-01/04-01/06-150-Anx1 13-06-2006 1/2 SL PT
PURL: https://www.legal-tools.org/doc/18e5a6/
Ituri militias agree to work with transitional government Page 2 of 2
national police force and the restoration of a system of justice [in Ituri]. The authority of the
state will be restored. If they do not seize the opportunity now afforded them to join the
reunification process of our country and to respect the constitution, then they will find
themselves enemies of the Republic, and the government of the Republic will take necessary
action."
The armed groups of Ituri were not party to the inter-Congolese dialogue, which led to a national
power-sharing accord in December 2002.
"There are a number of ways of bringing them into the process," Petronille Vaweka, president of
the Ituri interim assembly, said. "There is administration at the provincial and other levels, as
well as other state activities."
Economically-fuelled inter-ethnic fighting for Ituri's natural resources has resulted in more than
50,000 deaths and 500,000 internally displaced persons since war in the DRC erupted in August
1998.
An EU-led multinational force, known as Artemis, was deployed with a UN mandate in June to
protect civilians in Bunia, following an upsurge in fighting in May. By 1 September, it is due to be
relieved by peacekeepers from the UN Mission in DRC, known as MONUC, who have already
started to arrive.
[ENDS]
[Back] [Home Page]
Click here to send any feedback, comments or questions you have about IRIN's Website or if you prefer you can send an
Email to Webmaster
Copyright © IRIN 2006
The material contained on www.IRINnews.org comes to you via IRIN, a UN humanitarian news and information service, but
may not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations or its agencies.
All IRIN material may be reposted or reprinted free-of-charge; refer to the IRIN copyright page for conditions of use. IRIN
is a project of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
http://www.irinnews.org/print.asp7ReportID-36173 13/06/2006
DRC-OTP-0159-0277
ICC-01/04-01/06-150-Anx1 13-06-2006 2/2 SL PT
PURL: https://www.legal-tools.org/doc/18e5a6/